---
title: Nmap 
description: Networking
date: 2025-09-09
categories: [03_Certifications, 00_General, Youtube]
tags: [nmap,zenmap, Youtube, Learnings, Network, NotCompleted!!!!] 
---

# Nmap

## Theory You should know

### States of ports

The six port states recognized by Nmap.

open
: 
An application is actively **accepting TCP connections, UDP datagrams or SCTP associations on this port**. Finding these is often the primary goal of port scanning. *Security-minded people* know that **each open port is an avenue for attack**. Attackers and pen-testers want to **exploit** the open ports, while *administrators try to close or protect them with firewalls* without thwarting legitimate users. Open ports are also interesting for non-security scans because **they show services available for use on the network**.

closed
: 
A closed port is **accessible** (*it receives and responds to Nmap probe packets*), but there is **no application listening on it**. They can be **helpful in showing that a host is up** on an IP address (*host discovery, or ping scanning*), and as part of **OS detection**. Because closed ports are reachable, it may be worth scanning later in case some open up. Administrators may want to consider blocking such ports with a firewall. Then they would appear in the filtered state, discussed next.

filtered
: 
Nmap **cannot determine whether the port is open** because **packet filtering** prevents its probes from reaching the port. The filtering could be from a dedicated firewall device, router rules, or host-based firewall software. These ports frustrate attackers because they provide so little information. Sometimes they respond with ICMP error messages such as type 3 code 13 (destination unreachable: communication administratively prohibited), but filters that simply drop probes without responding are far more common. This forces Nmap to retry several times just in case the probe was dropped due to network congestion rather than filtering. **This slows down the scan dramatically**.

unfiltered
: 
The unfiltered state means that a port is **accessible**, but **Nmap is unable to determine whether it is open or closed**. Only the **ACK scan**, which is used to map firewall rulesets, classifies ports into this state. Scanning unfiltered ports with other scan types such as **Window scan, SYN scan, or FIN scan, may help resolve whether the port is open**.</p>

open|filtered
: 
Nmap places ports in this state when it is **unable to determine** whether a port is open or filtered. This occurs for scan types in which **open ports give no response**. The lack of response could also mean that a **packet filter dropped the probe** or any response it elicited. So **Nmap does not know** for sure whether the port is **open or being filtered**. The UDP, IP protocol, FIN, NULL, and Xmas scans classify ports this way.

closed|filtered
: 
This state is used when Nmap is **unable to determine** whether a port is closed or filtered. It is only used for the IP ID idle scan.

## Basic Scanning

### Manual Guide
`nmap -h` : 
`man nmap` : You wealthy of knowledge

`namp -V` : It display installed **version** of nmap.It helpful for troubleshooting, bug fixes, new features.


### 1. `-v` : Verbose
- It gives detail information about scanning process
```bash
nmap -v 10.253.198.113
```
- If we want to more information on scanning then **increase the verbosity level** by adding `v` in option `-vv`.
```bash
nmap -vv 10.253.198.113
```

### 2. Basic scan of single Target

- Scans without any option
```bash
nmap 10.253.198.113
```
or 
```bash
nmap nmap.scanme.org  # host name 
```
- network probing systematically scans the **1000 most common TCP/IP ports** 
- It divides ports into **six states**: open, closed, filtered, unfiltered, open|filtered, or closed|filtered.


### 3. Scan Multiple Target

```bash
nmap <target1IP> <target2IP> ....
```
- IP or hostnames separated by spcaes ` `


### 4. Scan an Entire Subnet

```bash
nmap <TargetIP/CIDR>
```

- nmap makes it easy by using **cdir classless interdomain routing notation**
- CIDR notation is a compact representation of network address and subnet mask in binary bits convinently separated by a class.

```bash
nmap 10.253.198.0/24
```
- scans all 256 IP address.

#### Subnet

### 5. Scan a Range of IP addresses

```bash
nmap 10.253.198.0-10
```
- scans all 10 Ip address

### 6. Scan a List of Targets `iL`

- A file contains list of IP
```ips.txt
10.253.198.113
45.33.7.298
192.168.134.98
192.168.1.35
192.168.13.45
192.168.16.99
```

- for scan IPs in `ips.txt`
```bash
namp -iL ips.txt
```

- `iL` : it instructs the nmap to extract the list of targets from the specified file.

### 7. Exclude Targets From a Scan `--exclude`, `--excludefile`

```bash
nmap {Your Targets} --exclude {Targets}
```

examples:
```bash
nmap 10.253.198.0/24 --exclude 10.253.198.113
```
```bash
nmap 10.253.198.0-255 --exclude 10.253.198.113
```
```bash
nmap -iL ips.txt --exclude 10.253.198.113
```


- `--excludefile`

```bash
nmap {Your Targets} --excludefile {filename.txt}
```

### Selecting a Network Interface